Title

Global distribution and transformation of dissolved organic matter along the aquatic continuum: from lakes to oceans

Abstract

Based on an extensive literature survey containing more than 13 000 paired observations of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations and absorption of chromophoric dissolved organic matter (CDOM) distributed over five continents and seven oceans, we described the global distribution and transformation of dissolved organic matter (DOM) along the aquatic continuum from lakes to oceans. A strong log-linear relationship (R2 = 0.92) between DOC and absorption of CDOM at 350 nm, acdom350, was observed at global scale, but was found to be ecosystem-dependent at local and regional scales. Our results show that as the DOM pool transited toward the oceans, the robustness of the observed relation decreased rapidly (R2 from 0.94 to 0.44) indicating a gradual decoupling between DOC and acdom350 as the connectivity between the landscape and its aquatic component decreased along the aquatic continuum. To support this hypothesis, we used the DOC-specific UV absorbance (SUVA) to characterize the reactivity of the DOM pool which decreased from  from 4.9 to 1.7 m2 x gC-1 along the aquatic continuum. Over a distance of 4000 km, a piecewise linear regression showed that the observed decrease of SUVA occurred more than 1300 times faster in freshwater ecosystems compared to marine water ecosystems, suggesting that degradation processes preferentially CDOM over DOC. The observed change in the DOM characteristics along the aquatic continuum suggests that the terrestrial DOM pool is gradually becoming less reactive, which can have profound consequences on cycling of organic carbon in aquatic ecosystems.

Biography

Dr. Massicotte obtained a Ph.D. in environmental sciences in 2012, followed by two-years as a post-doc in Quebec, Canada. and another two-years as a post-doc at Aarhus University in Denmark with Prof. Stiig Markager. The theme of his current research project is to better understand bio-optics and the dynamics of dissolved organic matter in natural aquatic ecosystems.
